how does the internet work
the video you are watching now
[Music]
traveled thousands of miles from a
google data center to reach you
let's learn how the internet works by
getting to understand the details of
this data's incredible journey
[Music]
the data center which can be thousands
of miles away from you
has your video stored inside it
how does this data reach your mobile
phone or laptop
an easy way to achieve this goal would
be with use of satellites
from the data center a signal could be
sent to the satellite via an antenna
and then from the satellite a signal
could be sent to your mobile phone via
another antenna near to you
however this way of transmitting signals
is not a good idea
let's see why
the satellite is parked nearly 22 000
miles above the earth's equator
so in order for the data transmission to
be successful the data would have to
travel a total distance of 44 000 miles
such a long distance of travel causes a
significant delay in receiving the
signal more specifically it causes huge
latency which is unacceptable for most
internet applications
so if this video does not reach you via
a satellite then how does it actually
get to you
well it is done with the help of a
complicated network of optical fiber
cables which connect between the data
center and your device
your phone could be connected to the
internet via cellular data or any wi-fi
router but ultimately at some point your
phone will be connected to this network
of optical fiber cables
we saw at the beginning that the video
you are currently watching is stored
inside a data center
to be more specific it is stored in a
solid state device within the data
center
this ssd acts as the internal memory of
a server the server is simply a powerful
computer whose job is to provide you the
video or other stored content when you
request it
now the challenge is how to transfer the
data stored in the data center
specifically to your device via the
complex network of optical fiber cables
let's see how this is done before
proceeding further we should first
understand an important concept which is
the concept of an ip address
every device that is connected to the
internet whether it is a server a
computer or a mobile phone is identified
uniquely by a string of numbers known as
an ip address
you can consider the ip address similar
to your home address
that is the address that uniquely
identifies your home
any letter sent to you reaches you
precisely because of your home address
similarly in the internet world an ip
address acts as a shipping address
through which all information reaches
its destination your internet service
provider will decide the ip address of
your device and you are able to see what
i p address your isp has given to your
mobile phone or laptop
the server in the data center also has
an ip address
the server stores a website so you can
access any website just by knowing the
server's ip address
however it is difficult for a person to
remember so many ip addresses so to
solve this problem domain names like
youtube.com facebook.com etc are used
which correspond to ip addresses which
are easier for us to remember than the
long sequence of numbers
another thing to notice here is that a
server has the capability of storing
several websites and if the server
consists of multiple websites all the
websites cannot be accessed with the
server's ip address
in such cases additional pieces of
information host headers are used to
uniquely identify the website
however for the giant websites like
facebook.com or youtube.com the entire
data center infrastructure will be
dedicated to the storage of the
particular website
to access the internet we always use
domain names instead of the complex i p
address numbers
from where does the internet get i p
addresses corresponding to our domain
name requests
well for this purpose the internet uses
a huge phone book known as dns
if you know a person's name but don't
know the telephone number you can simply
look it up in a phone book
the dns server provides the same service
to the internet your internet service
provider or other organizations can
manage the dns server
let's have a recap of the whole
operation
you enter the domain name the browser
sends a request to the dns server to get
the corresponding ip address
after getting the ip address your
browser simply forwards the request to
the data center
more specifically to the respective
server
once the server gets a request to access
a particular website the data flow
starts the data is transferred in
digital format via optical fiber cables
more specifically in the form of light
pulses
these light pulses sometimes have to
travel thousands of miles via the
optical fiber cable to reach their
destination
during their journey they often have to
go through tough terrains such as hilly
areas or under the sea
there are a few global companies who lay
and maintain these optical cable
networks
these visuals show how the laying of
optical fiber cables is done with the
help of a ship
a plow is dropped deep into the sea from
the ship
and this plow creates a trench on the
seabed into which is place the optical
fiber cable
in fact this complex optical cable
network is the backbone of the internet
these optical fiber cables carrying the
light are stretched across the seabed to
your doorstep where they are connected
to a router
the router converts these light signals
to electrical signals
an ethernet cable is then used to
transmit the electrical signals to your
laptop
however if you are accessing the
internet using cellular data from the
optical cable the signal has to be sent
to a cell tower
and from the cell tower the signal
reaches your cell phone in the form of
electromagnetic waves
since the internet is a global network
it has become important to have an
organization to manage things like ip
address assignment domain name
registration etc
this is all managed by an institution
called icann located in the usa one
amazing thing about the internet is its
efficiency in transmitting data when
compared with cellular and landline
communication technologies
this video you are watching from the
google data center is sent to you in the
form of a huge collection of zeros and
ones
what makes the data transfer in the
internet efficient is the way in which
these zeros and ones are chopped up into
small chunks known as packets and
transmitted
let's assume these streams of zeros and
ones are divided into different packets
by the server where each packet consists
of six bits
along with the bits of the video each
packet also consists of the sequence
number and the i p addresses of the
server and your phone
with this information the packets are
routed towards your phone
it's not necessary that all packets are
routed through the same path and each
packet independently takes the best
route available at that time
upon reaching your phone the packets are
reassembled according to their sequence
number
if it is the case that any packets fail
to reach your phone an acknowledgement
is sent from your phone to resend the
lost packets
now compare this with a postal network
with a good infrastructure but the
customers do not follow the basic rules
regarding the destination addresses
in this scenario letters won't be able
to reach the correct destination
similarly in the internet we use
something called protocols for the
management of this complex flow of data
packets
the protocols set the rules for data
packet conversion attachment of the
source and destination addresses to each
packet and the rules for routers etc for
different applications the protocols
used are different
we hope this video has given you a good
understanding about how the internet
works more specifically about the
amazing journey of data packets from the
data center to your mobile phone
please don't forget to support us at
patreon.com
thank you